Определение  
Tailings are a by-product of mining, consisting of the processed rock or soil left over from the separation of the commodities of value from the rock or soil within which they occur (adapted from GISTM, 2020).  

Primary reference(s)  
GISTM, 2020. Global Industry Standard on Tailings Management. Accessed 21 May 2025  

Annotations  
Additional scientific description  
Tailings are the fine-grained waste material remaining after the metals and minerals recoverable from processed soil or rock have been extracted. The material is produced at the 'tail end' of the process with a particle size normally ranging from 10 μm to 1.0 mm (UNECE, 2014:3). Tailings is a common by-product of the process of extracting valuable minerals and metals from mined ore. They usually take the form of a liquid slurry made of fine mineral particles, created as mined ore is crushed, ground and processed. Effective tailings management is integral to the safe and sustainable production of metals and minerals. (https://globaltailingsreview.org/about-tailings/).Tailings are produced from several types of mining operations, including aluminium, coal, oil sands, uranium and precious and base metals (Kossoff et al., 2014). The chemical composition of tailings depends on the mineralogy of the ore body, the degree of grinding, the processing activities used to extract metals, the efficiency of the extraction process and other changes that may occur within tailings storage facilities (TSFs). Major components usually include silica also known as silicon dioxide (SiO2), iron (Fe), oxygen (O), aluminium (Al), calcium (Ca), potassium (K), magnesium (Mg), manganese (Mn), sodium (Na), phosphorus (P), titanium (Ti) and sulphur (S) (Kossoff et al., 2014). Tailings may also contain toxic elements such as arsenic (As) or chemical reagents such as cyanide (CN−) which can be toxic in sufficient concentrations (Jewell, 1998).As an example, uranium tailings are radioactive and can retain the radioactive properties of the ore from which they are derived. In parallel, their radioactivity is very long-lived; they contain a range of potentially toxic heavy metals (see chemical HIPs on heavy metals)and other compounds; they may contain sulphidic minerals with the potential to generate acid mine drainage; and the typical range of particle sizes makes them leachable, erodible or prone to failure if they are poorly managed (IAEA, 2004:6).Tailings are also of concern due to the risk of tailing dam failures (one of the most common tailings storage methods). Failure of mining dams and the release of potentially toxic material can cause fatalities, affect water sources and sediment quality, fish, terrestrial animal life and plant life, cause sometimes irreversible environmental damage, and negatively impact biodiversity and the reputation of the mining industry. For example, on 25 January 2019, 272 people tragically lost their lives when a tailings dam collapsed at Vale's Córrego do Feijão mine in Brumadinho, Brazil.  

Metrics and numeric limits  
While the exact numbers of TSFs is uncertain and estimates vary, there are thought to be around 8500 TSFs globally (with around 3,250 of these active). The total global volume is unknown (UNEP, 2017) but of the 1743 sites for which data exist, the combined storage volume in 2020 was 45.5 billion m3. Estimates for the global production of tailings on an annual basis range from 8.85 - 14.4 billion tonnes per annum (Oberle et al., 2020). In 2019, the International Council on Mining and Metals (ICMM), the United Nations Environment (UN Environment) and the Principles for Responsible Investment (PRI) co-convened a global tailings review to establish an international standard (Global Tailings Review, 2019). The outcome of this work led to the publication in August 2020 of the Global Industry Standard on Tailings Management (ICMM, UNEP & PRI, 2020).  

Key relevant UN convention / multilateral treaty  
Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter (1972), also referred as the ‘London Convention’ prevents dumping of waste at sea. At the time of writing, there were 87 parties to the London Convention (IMO, 2019).  

UNECE Convention on the Transboundary Effects of Industrial Accidents (1992) at the time of writing had 41 Parties (UN Treaty Collection, 1992a).  

Convention on the Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses and International Lakes (1992) also referred as the ‘Water Convention’, applies as industrial accidents at tailings management facilities may lead to water pollution (UNECE, 2014). Serviced by the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE), it started as a regional convention but was opened up to countries outside the UNECE region in 2016. At the time of writing, it had 43 parties (UN Treaty Collection, 1992b).  

Directive 2006/21/EC on the management of waste from the extractive industries also referred as the Extractive Waste Directive (2006) (European Commission, 2019).  

Directive 2012/18/EU on the control of major-accident hazards involving dangerous substances, amending and subsequently repealing Council Directive 96/82/EC Text with EEA relevance also referred as the Seveso III Directive includes in its scope operational tailings disposal facilities, including tailing ponds or dams, containing dangerous substances (European Commission, 2019).  

Drivers  
TSF failures are occasionally associated with seismic activity but for rarely as seismicity is typically a critical aspect of the design considerations. One example where this occurred was in 2011 following the 9.0 magnitude earthquake off the coast of Japan's main island, Honshu, that led to the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster.As extreme rainfall events have become more prevalent due to climate change, this is a complicating factor in the management of water levels within TSFs. Some TSF failures have coincided with periods of heavy rainfall (e.g. the September 2024 failure of a TSF at Lanjigarh in Kalahandi district of Odisha - see here).  

Impacts  
Tailings may contain heavy metals, arsenic, string acids and strong bases and release them in the environment.  

Multi-hazard context  
The figure below summarises common interactions between tailings and other hazards. This information should be used with caution and not be solely relied upon in Disaster Risk Management, particularly as some interactions may not have been included. Note that hazardous events occurring together or locally in space or time may not necessarily cause, amplify, or be otherwise related to each other. Specific examples of multi-hazard context can be found in the ‘Hazard drivers’ and ‘Impacts’ sections above.  

Multi-hazard diagram  

Risk Management  
The most commonly used approach to the handling and storage of tailings is within dammed impoundments referred to as ‘tailings storage facilities (TSFs)’ (Oberle et al, 2020; World Bank, 2021). TSFs are engineered structures that comprise the confining embankments (commonly referred to as tailings dams) and are designed to contain tailings and to manage associated water. A They contain mixed waste material from mining processes in liquid or slurry form and must be responsibly managed to prevent impacts on human health and safety, the environment, and other infrastructure. Other less commonly used approaches for tailings disposal include riverine disposal, submarine disposal, lacustrine disposal (in lakes), backfilling underground workings, and dry stacking (some of which are dependent on prevailing conditions and regulations and some no longer considered to be good practice). Tailings are usually stored within TSFs under water to prevent the formation of surface dusts and acid mine drainage (by forestalling oxidation), especially when large amounts of acid-generating pyrite and pyrrhotite are present (Kossoff et al., 2014; Koomsona et al., 2021). This requires careful management of water levels within storage facilities to prevent erosion and related problems. TSFs require particularly careful management for preventing and minimising air, water, and soil contamination. The rate of failure has been estimated as one in 700 to one in 1750 which is significantly higher than for water-retaining dams – one in 10,000 (David, 2003). Causes of failure include overtopping, poor maintenance, breach following heavy rain, breach following earthquake, foundation failure, and retention wall failure (Kossoff et al., 2014). Furthermore, abandoned mining sites and mining waste storage facilities may contain chemicals and other elements which may be dangerous to human and animal health and to the wider environment. Effective legal and institutional frameworks for dam safety and environmental protection, implementation and enforcement of relevant laws and safety standards, adequate tailing dam designs based on accurate risk assessments, regular inspections and special monitoring systems are of critical importance for sound tailings management (Centre for Economic Development, Transport and the Environment, 2012). Application of technology-driven solutions such as remote sensing methods has shown significant development for tailing dam monitoring and early warning systems to prevent their failure. More attention needs to be given to monitoring of the leachate coming out of the ponds/dams.  

Monitoring  
The section and the table below offer an overview of monitoring tailings. This information can be used for forecasting within a national early warning system (EWS). Since EWS capacities and processes differ across countries, the most current and specific information regarding EWS should be obtained from the appropriate national or regional agency/authority responsible for disaster management.  

Кто/Какие организации производят данные/информацию о риске? | Программы наблюдения, реализуемые оператором TSF, в некоторых случаях в соответствии с регламентирующими требованиями  

Как наблюдается/мониторится/прогнозируется опасность? | Мониторинг с использованием приборов – сочетание наземных (например, пиззометры, инклинометры) и надземных (спутниковые технологии) вместе с прямыми полевыми наблюдениями. Программы наблюдения, включающие мониторинг приборов и визуальные осмотры, являются важными мерами управления рисками для TSF, и включают внутренний мониторинг (например, деформации, поровые давления и т. д.) и внешний мониторинг (например, для обнаружения деформации и утечки). Специфический для места операционный, обслуживающий и наблюдательный (OMS) руководитель должен быть разработан, описывающий требования OMS на основе классификации последствий TSF, текущих стандартов инженерного проектирования и особенностей места. Руководитель OMS должен включать: описание всех процедур мониторинга для инспекций и мониторинга приборов; уровни тревоги и сигналов для наблюдаемых параметров; процедуры отчётов о несоответствиях, инцидентах и сбоях; корректирующие действия; план действий в чрезвычайной ситуации. (Oberle et al., 2020; World Bank, 2021). Программы наблюдения также должны сосредоточиться на выявлении условий, при которых объявляется чрезвычайное состояние. Операторы должны разработать и (если необходимо) внедрить место‑специфичный план подготовки и реагирования на чрезвычайные ситуации (EPRP) для таких обстоятельств, особенно для любых условий, которые могут привести к катастрофическим сбоям (ICMM, 2021; ICMM, 2005).  

References  
Blowes, D.W., C.J. Ptacek, J.L. Jambor and C.G. Weisener, 2003. The Geochemistry of Acid Mine Drainage. Treatise on Geochemistry 9:612. Accessed 17 February 2025.  
Centre for Economic Development, Transport and the Environment, 2012. Dam Safety Guide. Accessed 17 February 2025.  
David, C.P., 2003. Heavy metal concentrations in growth bands of corals: A record of mine tailings input through time (Marinduque Island, Philippines). Marine Pollution Bulletin, 46, pp.187–196.  
European Commission, 2019. Extractive Waste. Accessed 17 February 2025.  
Global Tailings Review, 2019. Establishing an international standard for the safer management of tailings storage facilities. Accessed 17 February 2025.  
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), 2004. Environmental Contamination from Uranium Production Facilities and their Remediation. International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Accessed 17 February 2025.  
International Maritime Organization (IMO), 2019. Convention on the prevention of marine pollution by dumping of wastes and other matter. International Maritime Organization (IMO). Accessed 17 February 2025.  
International Council on Mining and Metals (ICMM), 2021. Tailings management: Good practice guide. Accessed 17 February 2025.  
International Council on Mining and Metals (ICMM) and United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), 2005. Good practice in emergency preparedness and response. Accessed 17 February 2025.  
International Council on Mining and Metals (ICMM), United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and Principles for Responsible Investment (PRI), 2020. Global industry standard on tailings management. Accessed 17 February 2025.  
Jewell, R.J., 1998. An introduction to tailings. In: Case Studies on Tailings Management. International Council on Metals and the Environment, 7-8.  
Koomsona, B., Fosub, S., Brakoa, B.A., Asiama, E.K. and Yanful, E.K., 2021. Assessing the acid mine drainage potential of a stockpiled gold bearing sulphide ore. Earth Sciences Malaysia (ESMY), 5(1), pp.58–64. Accessed 21 May 2025.  
Kossoff, D., W.E. Dubbin, M. Alfredsson, S.J. Edwards, M.G. Macklin and K.A. Hudson-Edwards, 2014. Mine tailings dams: characteristics, failure, environmental impacts, and remediation. Applied Geochemistry, 51:229-245.  
Oberle, B., Brereton, D. and Mihaylova, A. (eds.), 2020. Towards zero harm: A compendium of papers prepared for the Global Tailings Review. London: Global Tailings Review. Accessed 17 February 2025.  
United Nations Treaty Collection, 1992a. Environment: Chapter XXVII. Convention on the transboundary effects of industrial accidents. Accessed 17 February 2025.  
United Nations Treaty Collection, 1992b. Chapter XXVII. Environment: Convention on the protection and use of transboundary watercourses and international lakes. Accessed 17 February 2025.  
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE), 2014. Safety guidelines and good practices for tailings management facilities. United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE). Accessed 17 February 2025.  
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), 2017. New report urges global action on mining pollution. United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). Accessed 17 February 2025.  
World Bank, 2021. Technical Note 7: Tailings storage facilities. Washington DC: World Bank. Accessed 17 February 2025.  

Cite this [Copy citation]