Definition  
Desertifikation bezeichnet die Landdegradation in trockenen, halbtrockenen und trockenen sub-humiden Gebieten, die durch verschiedene Faktoren verursacht wird, einschließlich klimatischer Veränderungen und menschlicher Aktivitäten (UNCCD, 2017).  

Primary reference(s)  
UNCCD, 2017. UNCCD Terminologie: Desertifikation. United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD). Abgerufen am 21. Januar 2025.  

Annotations  
Additional scientific description  
Desertifikation und Landdegradation sind sehr ernsthafte Herausforderungen. Sie führen zu Hunger und Armut, fördern Arbeitslosigkeit, erzwungene Migration und Konflikte, während sie das Risiko extremer Wetterphänomene im Zusammenhang mit dem Klimawandel erhöhen (FAO, 2020a).  
Die am weitesten akzeptierte Definition von Desertifikation in China ist die von Zhu et al. (1989, zitiert von FAO, 1997). Zhu beschreibt Desertifikation als den Degradationsprozess in Umgebungen, die denen von Wüsten ähneln, bestehend aus verweherten und wellenförmigen Sandebenen und mobilen Dünen, der auftritt, wenn fragile Ökosysteme wie solche mit losen sandigen Oberflächen in trockenen, halbtrockenen und sub-humiden Zonen der Dürre und häufigem Wind ausgesetzt sind.  
Dieser Prozess reduziert die Biomasseproduktivität und das Ackerland. Die durch Desertifikation verursachten Umweltveränderungen führen zu sandähnlichen Landschaften in aboriginalen nicht-wüstenartigen Gebieten oder Steppen (FAO, 1997). Desertifikation ist eine stille, unsichtbare Krise, die Gemeinschaften weltweit destabilisiert. Während die Auswirkungen des Klimawandels die Lebensgrundlagen untergraben, bricht zwischen ethnischen Gruppen in und über Staatsgrenzen hinweg Konflikt aus und fragile Staaten wenden sich der Militarisierung zu, um die Situation zu kontrollieren (UNCCD, 2014).  
Im Jahr 2008 löste die Nahrungsmittelunsicherheit in mehr als 30 Ländern Unruhen aus. Trockengebiete, die nahezu 34 % der Landmasse ausmachen und eine wichtige Quelle der Ernährungssicherheit, insbesondere für die Armen, darstellen, werden täglich degradieren (UNCCD, 2014).  
Es wird geschätzt, dass 135 Millionen Menschen Gefahr laufen, durch Desertifikation vertrieben zu werden. Das Problem ist am stärksten in Subsahara-Afrika, insbesondere im Sahel und am Horn von Afrika (UNCCD, 2014).  
Insgesamt 842 Millionen Menschen, oder etwa einer von acht Menschen weltweit, litten laut Schätzungen im Zeitraum 2011-2013 an chronischem Hunger, und jedes Jahr werden 12 Millionen Hektar nutzbare Landflächen allein durch Desertifikation und Dürre verarmt, was eine verpasste Chance bedeutet, 20 Millionen Tonnen Getreide zu produzieren (UNCCD, 2014). Ernteerträge könnten in einigen afrikanischen Ländern um bis zu 50 % sinken, wenn die Produktionspraktiken nicht geändert werden (UNCCD, 2014).  

Metrics and numeric limits  
Key facts from Action Against Desertification: land degradation affects almost 2 billion ha of land worldwide, home to 3.2 billion people; every year, 24 billion tonnes of fertile soils are lost due to erosion; and 12 million ha of land are degraded each year – this is 23 ha per minute (FAO, 2020a). 0a).  

Key relevant UN convention / multilateral treaty  
Established in 1994, the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) is the sole legally binding international agreement linking environment and development to sustainable land management (UNCCD, 2017). The Convention addresses specifically the arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid areas, known as the drylands, where some of the most vulnerable ecosystems and peoples can be found.  

Article 1: ‘Combating desertification’ includes activities which are part of the integrated development of land in arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid areas for sustainable development, which are aimed at  

Drivers  
Some of the drivers of desertification include those related to climatic variations, such as drought as well as strong winds and heavy rainfall, which destroy and damage vegetation, and human activities, such as over-cultivation, overgrazing, unsustainable agricultural practices (from not rotating crops to unprotected soils or chemical fertiliser and pesticide use), and deforestation, which also increases the risk of fires, among others (UNCCD, 2011). In the climate change context, increased global temperatures leading to higher evaporation and reduced soil moisture can also increase the risk of desertification. Desertification combined with land degradation and drought in rural areas where people rely on limited productive land resources is one of the drivers of forced migration (UNCCD, 2014).  

Impacts  
The effects of desertification are increasingly felt globally as victims turn into refugees, internally displaced people and forced migrants.  

Multi-hazard context  
The figure below summarises common interactions between desertification and other hazards. This information should be used with caution and not be solely relied upon in Disaster Risk Management, particularly as some interactions may not have been included. Note that hazardous events occurring together or locally in space or time may not necessarily cause, amplify, or be otherwise related to each other. Specific examples of multi-hazard context can be found in the ‘Hazard drivers’ and ‘Impacts’ sections above.  

Multi-hazard diagram  

Risk Management  
At the UN General Assembly in 2012, desertification, land degradation and drought were addressed in the resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 27 July 2012 (UNGA, 2012). Two quotes of particular relevance are included here: “We stress that desertification, land degradation and drought are challenges of a global dimension and continue to pose serious challenges to the sustainable development of all countries, in particular developing countries.”“We recognise the need for urgent action to reverse land degradation. In view of this, we will strive to achieve a land-degradation-neutral world in the context of sustainable development. This should act to catalyse financial resources from a range of public and private sources.” Over 2 billion ha of land have potential for recovery through restoration approaches that combine activities like forestry with farmland re-vegetation. The restoration of over 5 million ha of land by communities that live across Burkina Faso, Niger and Mali has reversed outward migration flows (UNCCD, 2014). Action Against Desertification (started in 2014) is an initiative of the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States (ACP) to restore drylands and degraded lands in Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific to tackle the detrimental social, economic and environmental impact of land degradation and desertification (FAO, 2020b). Action Against Desertification supports local communities, government and civil society in six African countries – Burkina Faso, Ethiopia, The Gambia, Niger, Nigeria and Senegal – as well as Fiji and Haiti to restore degraded land and to manage fragile ecosystems in a sustainable way. It is using a mix of the following activities (FAO, 2020b): Land restoration: putting rural communities at the heart of restoration and upscaling interventions to meet the massive needsNon-timber forest products: support economic growth and sustainable management of natural resourcesCapacity development: strengthening capacities in sustainable land management and land restorationMonitoring and evaluation: collecting data, keeping track of progress, measuring impactInformation sharing: knowledge exchange and awareness-raising about land degradation and desertificationSouth–South cooperation: sharing lessons learned on how to reverse land degradation In sub-Saharan Africa, where half a billion inhabitants are rural, the majority live off the land and desertification is a constant threat to their livelihoods. More than 3.2 billion people in the world depend on degraded land for their livelihoods, and 74% of them are poor. Under the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD), the international legal framework for tackling desertification, land degradation and drought, 169 of its 194 Parties have declared that they are affected by desertification. Action Against Desertification is a key partner of the Great Green Wall initiative, Africa’s flagship programme to combat the effects of climate change and desertification across North Africa, the Sahel and the Horn of Africa (FAO, 2020b). Key results to date from Action Against Desertification (FAO, 2020c) are summarised in the table below:  

Monitoring  
FAO monitors desertification using Land Degradation Assessment in Drylands (LADA) through remote sensing and socio-economic analysis.  

References  
FAO, 1997. FAO Environment and Energy Paper 15. Drylands development and combating desertification. Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations (FAO). Accessed 21 January 2025.  
FAO, 2020a. Action against desertification: Desertification and land degradation. Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations (FAO). Accessed 21 January 2025.  
FAO, 2020b. Action against desertification: Overview. Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations (FAO). Accessed 21 January 2025.  
FAO, 2020c. Action against desertification: Activities. Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations (FAO). Accessed 21 January 2025.  
UNCCD, 2011. Desertification: A virtual synthesis. Accessed 19 July 2024.  
UNCCD, 2014. Desertification: The invisible frontline. 2nd Ed. United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD). Accessed 21 January 2025.  
UNCCD, 2017. United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa. Accessed 21 January 2025.  
UNGA, 2012. Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 27 July 2012. Desertification, land degradation and drought, pp. 40-41. A/RES/66/288. United Nations General Assembly (UNGA). Accessed 21 January 2025.  
Zhu, Z., Liu, S., and Di, X., 1989. Desertification and rehabilitation in China. Science Press, Beijing.  

Cite this [Copy citation]